[pipes] document custom messages (#19016)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/guides/dagster-pipes/subprocess/reference.mdx

</TabItem>
</TabGroup>

---

## Passing custom data

> Sometimes, you may want to pass data back from the external process for use in the orchestration code for purposes other than reporting directly to Dagster such as use in creating an output. In this example we use custom messages to create an IO managed output that is returned from the asset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, you may want to pass data back from the external process for use in the orchestration code for purposes other than reporting directly to Dagster such as use in creating an output. In this example we use custom messages to create an I/O managed output that is returned from the asset.
```

nit ⛏️

</TabItem>
</TabGroup>

---

## Passing custom data

> Sometimes, you may want to pass data back from the external process for use in the orchestration code for purposes other than reporting directly to Dagster.

Reviewer: Such as?

<TabGroup>
<TabItem name="External code in external_code.py">

In the external code, we send messages using `report_custom_message`. The message can be any data that is JSON serializable.

```python file=/guides/dagster/dagster_pipes/subprocess/custom_messages/external_code.py
from dagster_pipes import PipesContext, open_dagster_pipes

def main():
    # get the Dagster Pipes context
    context = PipesContext.get()

>     data = {"type": "example_msg", "data": 42}  # send any JSON serializable data

Reviewer: Can we use a real example here? Even if it's something like reporting how many records were processed - we get a fair number of complaints about overly simplistic examples.

    context.report_custom_message(data)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # connect to Dagster Pipes
    with open_dagster_pipes():
        main()
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem name="Dagster code in dagster_code.py">

In the Dagster code we receive custom messages using `get_custom_messages`.

```python file=/guides/dagster/dagster_pipes/subprocess/custom_messages/dagster_code.py
import shutil

from dagster import (
    Definitions,
    OpExecutionContext,
    PipesSubprocessClient,
    file_relative_path,
    job,
    op,
)

@op

> def subprocess_op(context: OpExecutionContext, pipes_client: PipesSubprocessClient):

Reviewer: Why ops over assets here?

Author: the thinking was it would be good to diversify our examples and show that this stuff can be used in ops as well but I can certainly change it

Reviewer: Perhaps we can change the example to assets since that's the focus, and mention that this is also possible with ops?
